Clarify the HTTP client `http.retry_count` spec (#2743)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `http.url` | string | Full HTTP request URL in the form `scheme://host[:port]/path?query[#fragment]`. Usually the fragment is not transmitted over HTTP, but if it is known, it should be included nevertheless. [1] | `https://www.foo.bar/search?q=OpenTelemetry#SemConv` | Required |
| `http.resend_count` | int | The ordinal number of request resending attempt (for any reason, including redirects). [2] | `3` | Recommended: if and only if request was retried. |
| [`net.peer.name`](span-general.md) | string | Host identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) HTTP request is sent to. [3] | `example.com` | Required |
| [`net.peer.port`](span-general.md) | int | Port identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) HTTP request is sent to. [4] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Conditionally Required: [5] |

**[1]:** `http.url` MUST NOT contain credentials passed via URL in form of `https://username:password@www.example.com/`. In such case the attribute's value should be `https://www.example.com/`.

> **[2]:** The resend count SHOULD be updated each time an HTTP request gets resent by the client, regardless of what was the cause of the resending (e.g. redirection, authorization failure, 503 Server Unavailable, network issues, or any other).

Reviewer: What is considered as a "redirect"? Could a browser get an HTTP redirect response which points to FTP?

Reviewer 2: That's not really relevant. If there would be such a thing as a redirect to FTP, you would not resend the HTTP request, so the point is moot. This spec part has the purpose of _not_ needing to care whether it's a redirect or not.

Author: Also, I think it's up to the HTTP spec to define what a "redirect" or a "resend" is -- we're just using these terms here in the same meaning as in https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110

Reviewer: I'm very confused, this PR suggests that "resend count SHOULD be updated each time **an HTTP request gets resent**", what does "an HTTP request gets resent" mean? "An HTTP request" = same HTTP request (same verb, URI, headers, payload) or something else (e.g. as long as it is a redirect, it is considered as "an HTTP request")?

Reviewer: > That's not really relevant. If there would be such a thing as a redirect to FTP, you would not resend the HTTP request (you might establish an FTP connection), so the point is moot.

The proposal seems to imply that redirects can only happen from HTTP to HTTP, and that's why I asked for clarification. Do we know that for all the other protocols that HTTP can redirect to, there is guarantee that they won't redirect back to HTTP? (or do we want to say if the redirect points to something that is not HTTP, that's undefined behavior which is not intended to be covered by the spec?)

Reviewer 2: > The proposal seems to imply that redirects can only happen from HTTP to HTTP

That's not what this implies. This attribute is only set on spans tracing HTTP requests, so it does not matter to this spec if you get redirected to something else, because then you get outside the scope of this spec. Maybe the confusion comes from the word "updated"? Because actually you should not update the attribute on the span, but just make sure that the next span your instrumentation produces for the same logical request hast the attribute incremented.

Reviewer 2: > what does "an HTTP request gets resent" mean?

As @mateuszrzeszutek mentioned, this term is also used in the RFC (https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110#name-redirection-3xx). It's also not clearly & generally defined there and I think that's OK. APIs/libraries and consequently instrumentations will have different possibilities to track what a "resend" is.
If you asked me, I would say: A request is resent when an HTTP client library sends more than one HTTP request to satisfy the same API call. This may happen due to following redirects (that's the context where the RFC uses it), "retries" (which are not clearly defined either), authentication challenges, and maybe other reasons I'm not aware of.

Reviewer: > If you asked me, I would say: A request is resent when an HTTP client library sends more than one HTTP request to satisfy the same API call. This may happen due to following redirects (that's the context where the RFC uses it), "retries" (which are not clearly defined either), authentication challenges, and maybe other reasons I'm not aware of.

This makes a lot of sense and I think it's a good addition to the spec since it clarifies a lot.

Reviewer: > > Do we know that for all the other protocols that HTTP can redirect to, there is guarantee that they won't redirect back to HTTP?
> 
> No, we but I don't think we need to specify this, it seems to be an highly hypothetical edge case. (AFAIK, the concept of "redirect" does not exist in many protocols other than HTTP, in the first place). You could also argue this for the previous spec "what if after an HTTP failure, the retry happens by downloading the URL from FTP?". I think these questions are not relevant in practice.

I don't know if it's rare of not (not an expert in protocols), here is my concern (and the reason why I asked these questions):
1. Do we have domain experts here?
2. When we don't have a clear picture/understanding, do we try to be clear+defensive (e.g. callout that "if the redirect/retry/etc. points to something that is not HTTP, it is out of the scope of this spec) or leave it vague (and assume that we won't run into the problems)?

Reviewer: The last question is not a blocker for this PR, marking it as resolved for now to unblock the progress.

A CLIENT span SHOULD be created for each one of these physical requests.
No span is created corresponding to the "logical" (encompassing) request.

> For each re-sent HTTP request, `http.retry_count` attribute SHOULD be added to each retry span

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For each time a HTTP request is re-sent, the `http.retry_count` attribute SHOULD be added to each retry span
```

Reviewer 3: Sorry if this was already discussed, but I wonder why do we use `retry` in the key name, but in the text `re-send`? 🤔. Like, why we don't say: `For each time a HTTP request is retried, the..`?

Reviewer 3: Another suggestion, would be dropping "For each":

```suggestion
Each time an HTTP request is re-sent, the `http.retry_count` attribute SHOULD be added to each retry span
```

> set to the ordinal number of the request re-send attempt.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and set to the ordinal number of the request re-send attempt.
```

> with the value that reflects the ordinal number of request re-send attempt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
set to the ordinal number of the request re-send attempt.
```

Reviewer 3: if going with the suggestion, don't forget an `and` before `set` :)

 |
 --- server (SERVER, trace=t1, span=s2)

GET / - 500 (CLIENT, trace=t2, span=s1, http.resend_count=1)
 |
 --- server (SERVER, trace=t2, span=s2)

GET / - 200 (CLIENT, trace=t3, span=s1, http.resend_count=2)
 |
 --- server (SERVER, trace=t3, span=s1)
```

### HTTP client authorization retry examples

Example of retries in the presence of a trace started by an inbound request:

```
request (SERVER, trace=t1, span=s1)
  |

>   -- GET / - 401 (CLIENT, trace=t1, span=s2)

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't the initial call here also be `/hello`? Or am I missing something? Also in the examples in `Example of retries with no trace started upfront`.

Author: Good catch, thanks! I'll fix these.

 --- server (SERVER, trace=t3, span=s1)
```

### HTTP client authorization retry examples

> Example of redirects in the presence of a trace started by an inbound request:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example of retries in the presence of a trace started by an inbound request:
```

```
request (SERVER, trace=t1, span=s1)
  |
  -- GET / - 401 (CLIENT, trace=t1, span=s2)
  |   |
  |   --- server (SERVER, trace=t1, span=s3)
  |
  -- GET /hello - 200 (CLIENT, trace=t1, span=s4, http.retry_count=1)
      |
      --- server (SERVER, trace=t1, span=s5)
```

> Example of redirects with no trace started upfront:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example of retries with no trace started upfront:
```

```
GET / - 401 (CLIENT, trace=t1, span=s1)
 |
 --- server (SERVER, trace=t1, span=s2)

> GET /hello - 200 (CLIENT, trace=t2, span=s1, http.retry_count=1)

Reviewer 2: Ugh, that this causes another trace to be started is ugly, but a logical consequence of how things are defined. So I think the example is correct, but maybe this hints at room for improvement (in _some_ way, e.g. adding a mechanism to starting multiple root spans in the with the same trace ID; changing the parent/child relationships of the HTTP spans like all becoming children of the first attempt; etc.)

Author: > hanging the parent/child relationships of the HTTP spans like all becoming children of the first attempt

I think it could be a little confusing, like for example the first SERVER span would be on the same level as all the resent CLIENT spans.

How about using span links though? Spans emitted for resent HTTP requests could have a link to the original CLIENT span (in fact, the `retry_count` could even be an attribute of the link, not the span itself).
